Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

AN IMAGE REPRESENTATION BASED CONVOLUTIONAL
NETWORK FOR DNA CLASSIFICATION

Bojian Yin1, Marleen Balvert1,2, Davide Zambrano1, Alexander Schönhuth1,2,†, and Sander M.

Bohte1,†

1Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI), Amsterdam, The Netherlands

2Department of Biology, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands

†Joint last authorship

ABSTRACT

The folding structure of the DNA molecule combined with helper molecules, also
referred to as the chromatin, is highly relevant for the functional properties of
DNA. The chromatin structure is largely determined by the underlying primary
DNA sequence, though the interaction is not yet fully understood. In this paper
we develop a convolutional neural network that takes an image-representation of
primary DNA sequence as its input, and predicts key determinants of chromatin
structure. The method is developed such that it is capable of detecting interactions
between distal elements in the DNA sequence, which are known to be highly rele-
vant. Our experiments show that the method outperforms several existing methods
both in terms of prediction accuracy and training time.

INTRODUCTION

1
DNA is perceived as a sequence over the letters {A,C,G,T}, the alphabet of nucleotides. This
sequence constitutes the code that acts as a blueprint for all processes taking place in a cell. But
beyond merely reﬂecting primary sequence, DNA is a molecule, which implies that DNA assumes
spatial structure and shape. The spatial organization of DNA is achieved by integrating (“recruiting”)
other molecules, the histone proteins, that help to assume the correct spatial conﬁguration. The
combination of DNA and helper molecules is called chromatin; the spatial conﬁguration of the
chromatin, ﬁnally, deﬁnes the functional properties of local areas of the DNA (de Graaf & van
Steensel, 2013).
Chromatin can assume several function-deﬁning epigenetic states, where states vary along the
genome (Ernst et al., 2011). The key determinant for spatial conﬁguration is the underlying pri-
mary DNA sequence: sequential patterns are responsible for recruiting histone proteins and their
chemical modiﬁcations, which in turn give rise to or even deﬁne the chromatin states. The exact
conﬁguration of the chromatin and its interplay with the underlying raw DNA sequence are under
active research. Despite many enlightening recent ﬁndings (e.g. Brueckner et al., 2016; The EN-
CODE Project Consortium, 2012; Ernst & Kellis, 2013), comprehensive understanding has not yet
been reached. Methods that predict chromatin related states from primary DNA sequence are thus of
utmost interest. In machine learning, many prediction methods are available, of which deep neural
networks have recently been shown to be promising in many applications (LeCun et al., 2015). Also
in biology deep neural networks have been shown to be valuable (see Angermueller et al. (2016) for
a review).
Although DNA is primarily viewed as a sequence, treating genome sequence data as just a sequence
neglects its inherent and biologically relevant spatial conﬁguration and the resulting interaction be-
tween distal sequence elements. We hypothesize that a deep neural network designed to account for
long-term interactions can improve performance. Additionally, the molecular spatial conﬁguration
of DNA suggests the relevance of a higher-dimensional spatial representation of DNA. However, due
to the lack of comprehensive understanding with respect to the structure of the chromatin, sensible
suggestions for such higher-dimensional representations of DNA do not exist.

1

