Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

EMERGENT COMMUNICATION IN A
MULTI-MODAL, MULTI-STEP REFERENTIAL GAME

Katrina Evtimova1, Andrew Drozdov2, Douwe Kiela3, and Kyunghyun Cho1,2,3,4

1Center for Data Science. New York University

2Department of Computer Science. New York University

3Facebook AI Research

4CIFAR Azrieli Global Scholar

ABSTRACT

Inspired by previous work on emergent communication in referential games, we
propose a novel multi-modal, multi-step referential game, where the sender and
receiver have access to distinct modalities of an object, and their information
exchange is bidirectional and of arbitrary duration. The multi-modal multi-step
setting allows agents to develop an internal communication signiﬁcantly closer
to natural language, in that they share a single set of messages, and that the
length of the conversation may vary according to the difﬁculty of the task. We
examine these properties empirically using a dataset consisting of images and
textual descriptions of mammals, where the agents are tasked with identifying the
correct object. Our experiments indicate that a robust and efﬁcient communication
protocol emerges, where gradual information exchange informs better predictions
and higher communication bandwidth improves generalization.

1

INTRODUCTION

Recently, there has been a surge of work on neural network-based multi-agent systems that are
capable of communicating with each other in order to solve a problem. Two distinct lines of research
can be discerned. In the ﬁrst one, communication is used as an essential tool for sharing information
among multiple active agents in a reinforcement learning scenario (Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Foerster
et al., 2016; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017; Andreas et al., 2017). Each of the active agents is, in addition
to its traditional capability of interacting with the environment, able to communicate with other agents.
A population of such agents is subsequently jointly tuned to reach a common goal. The main goal of
this line of work is to use communication (which may be continuous) as a means to enhance learning
in a difﬁcult, sparse-reward environment. The communication may also mimic human conversation,
e.g., in settings where agents engage in natural language dialogue based on a shared visual modality
(Das et al., 2017; Strub et al., 2017).
In contrast, the goal of our work is to learn the communication protocol, and aligns more closely
with another line of research, which focuses on investigating and analyzing the emergence of
communication in (cooperative) multi-agent referential games (Lewis, 2008; Skyrms, 2010; Steels &
Loetzsch, 2012), where one agent (the sender) must communicate what it sees using some discrete
emergent communication protocol, while the other agent (the receiver) is tasked with ﬁguring out
what the ﬁrst agent saw. These lines of work are partially motivated by the idea that artiﬁcial
communication (and other manifestations of machine intelligence) can emerge through interacting
with the world and/or other agents, which could then converge towards human language (Gauthier &
Mordatch, 2016; Mikolov et al., 2015; Lake et al., 2016; Kiela et al., 2016). (Lazaridou et al., 2016)
have recently proposed a basic version of this game, where there is only a single transmission of a
message from the sender to the receiver, as a test bed for both inducing and analyzing a communication
protocol between two neural network-based agents. A related approach to using a referential game
with two agents is proposed by (Andreas & Klein, 2016). (Jorge et al., 2016) have more recently
introduced a game similar to the setting above, but with multiple transmissions of messages between

1

