Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

EMERGENCE OF GRID-LIKE REPRESENTATIONS BY
TRAINING RECURRENT NEURAL NETWORKS TO
PERFORM SPATIAL LOCALIZATION

Christopher J. Cueva∗, Xue-Xin Wei∗
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027, USA
{ccueva,weixxpku}@gmail.com

ABSTRACT

Decades of research on the neural code underlying spatial navigation have re-
vealed a diverse set of neural response properties. The Entorhinal Cortex (EC) of
the mammalian brain contains a rich set of spatial correlates, including grid cells
which encode space using tessellating patterns. However, the mechanisms and
functional signiﬁcance of these spatial representations remain largely mysterious.
As a new way to understand these neural representations, we trained recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) to perform navigation tasks in 2D arenas based on veloc-
ity inputs. Surprisingly, we ﬁnd that grid-like spatial response patterns emerge in
trained networks, along with units that exhibit other spatial correlates, including
border cells and band-like cells. All these different functional types of neurons
have been observed experimentally. The order of the emergence of grid-like and
border cells is also consistent with observations from developmental studies. To-
gether, our results suggest that grid cells, border cells and others as observed in EC
may be a natural solution for representing space efﬁciently given the predominant
recurrent connections in the neural circuits.

1

INTRODUCTION

Understanding the neural code in the brain has long been driven by studying feed-forward architec-
tures, starting from Hubel and Wiesel’s famous proposal on the origin of orientation selectivity in
primary visual cortex (Hubel & Wiesel, 1962). Inspired by the recent development in deep learn-
ing (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; LeCun et al., 2015; Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997; Mnih et al.,
2015), there has been a burst of interest in applying deep feedforward models, in particular convolu-
tional neural networks (CNN) (LeCun et al., 1998), to study the sensory systems, which hierarchi-
cally extract useful features from sensory inputs (see e.g., Yamins et al. (2014); Kriegeskorte (2015);
Kietzmann et al. (2017); Yamins & DiCarlo (2016)).
For more cognitive tasks, neural systems often need to maintain certain internal representations
of relevant variables in the absence of external stimuli- a process that requires more than feature
extraction. We will focus on spatial navigation, which typically requires the brain to maintain a
representation of self-location and update it according to the animal’s movements and landmarks
of the environment. Physiological studies done in rodents and other mammals (including humans,
non-human primates and bats) have revealed a variety of neural correlates of space in Hippocampus
and Entorhinal Cortex (EC), including place cells (O’Keefe, 1976), grid cells (Fyhn et al., 2004;
Hafting et al., 2005; Fyhn et al., 2008; Yartsev et al., 2011; Killian et al., 2012; Jacobs et al., 2013),
along with border cells (Solstad et al., 2008), band-like cells (Krupic et al., 2012) and others (see
Figure 1a). In particular, each grid cell only ﬁres when the animal occupies a distinct set of physical
locations, and strikingly these locations lie on a lattice. The study of the neural underpinning of
spatial cognition has provided an important window into how high-level cognitive functions are
supported in the brain (Moser et al., 2008; Aronov et al., 2017).

∗equal contribution

1

