Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

WORD TRANSLATION WITHOUT PARALLEL DATA

Guillaume Lample∗† ‡ , Alexis Conneau∗† § ,
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato† , Ludovic Denoyer‡ , Herv´e J´egou†
{glample,aconneau,ranzato,rvj}@fb.com
ludovic.denoyer@upmc.fr

ABSTRACT

State-of-the-art methods for learning cross-lingual word embeddings have relied
on bilingual dictionaries or parallel corpora. Recent studies showed that the need
for parallel data supervision can be alleviated with character-level information.
While these methods showed encouraging results, they are not on par with their
supervised counterparts and are limited to pairs of languages sharing a common
alphabet. In this work, we show that we can build a bilingual dictionary between
two languages without using any parallel corpora, by aligning monolingual word
embedding spaces in an unsupervised way. Without using any character informa-
tion, our model even outperforms existing supervised methods on cross-lingual
tasks for some language pairs. Our experiments demonstrate that our method
works very well also for distant language pairs, like English-Russian or English-
Chinese. We ﬁnally describe experiments on the English-Esperanto low-resource
language pair, on which there only exists a limited amount of parallel data, to show
the potential impact of our method in fully unsupervised machine translation. Our
code, embeddings and dictionaries are publicly available1.

1

INTRODUCTION

Most successful methods for learning distributed representations of words (e.g. Mikolov et al.
(2013c;a); Pennington et al. (2014); Bojanowski et al. (2017)) rely on the distributional hypoth-
esis of Harris (1954), which states that words occurring in similar contexts tend to have similar
meanings. Levy & Goldberg (2014) show that the skip-gram with negative sampling method of
Mikolov et al. (2013c) amounts to factorizing a word-context co-occurrence matrix, whose entries
are the pointwise mutual information of the respective word and context pairs. Exploiting word co-
occurrence statistics leads to word vectors that reﬂect the semantic similarities and dissimilarities:
similar words are close in the embedding space and conversely.
Mikolov et al. (2013b) ﬁrst noticed that continuous word embedding spaces exhibit similar structures
across languages, even when considering distant language pairs like English and Vietnamese. They
proposed to exploit this similarity by learning a linear mapping from a source to a target embedding
space. They employed a parallel vocabulary of ﬁve thousand words as anchor points to learn this
mapping and evaluated their approach on a word translation task. Since then, several studies aimed
at improving these cross-lingual word embeddings (Faruqui & Dyer (2014); Xing et al. (2015);
Lazaridou et al. (2015); Ammar et al. (2016); Artetxe et al. (2016); Smith et al. (2017)), but they all
rely on bilingual word lexicons.
Recent attempts at reducing the need for bilingual supervision (Smith et al., 2017) employ identical
character strings to form a parallel vocabulary. The iterative method of Artetxe et al. (2017) gradu-
ally aligns embedding spaces, starting from a parallel vocabulary of aligned digits. These methods
are however limited to similar languages sharing a common alphabet, such as European languages.
Some recent methods explored distribution-based approach (Cao et al., 2016) or adversarial training
Zhang et al. (2017b) to obtain cross-lingual word embeddings without any parallel data. While these

∗Equal contribution. Order has been determined with a coin ﬂip.
†Facebook AI Research
‡Sorbonne Universit´es, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7606, LIP6
§LIUM, University of Le Mans
1https://github.com/facebookresearch/MUSE

1

