Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

SYNTHESIZING REALISTIC NEURAL
POPULATION ACTIVITY PATTERNS USING
GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL NETWORKS

Manuel Molano-Mazon1,+, Arno Onken1,2, Eugenio Piasini1,3,∗, Stefano Panzeri1,∗
1Laboratory of Neural Computation, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 38068 Rovereto (TN), Italy
2University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
3University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
+Corresponding author
∗Equal contribution
manuel.molano@iit.it, aonken@inf.ed.ac.uk, epiasini@sas.upenn.edu,
stefano.panzeri@iit.it

ABSTRACT

The ability to synthesize realistic patterns of neural activity is crucial for studying
neural information processing. Here we used the Generative Adversarial Net-
works (GANs) framework to simulate the concerted activity of a population of
neurons. We adapted the Wasserstein-GAN variant to facilitate the generation of
unconstrained neural population activity patterns while still beneﬁting from pa-
rameter sharing in the temporal domain. We demonstrate that our proposed GAN,
which we termed Spike-GAN, generates spike trains that match accurately the
ﬁrst- and second-order statistics of datasets of tens of neurons and also approxi-
mates well their higher-order statistics. We applied Spike-GAN to a real dataset
recorded from salamander retina and showed that it performs as well as state-of-
the-art approaches based on the maximum entropy and the dichotomized Gaus-
sian frameworks. Importantly, Spike-GAN does not require to specify a priori the
statistics to be matched by the model, and so constitutes a more ﬂexible method
than these alternative approaches. Finally, we show how to exploit a trained Spike-
GAN to construct ’importance maps’ to detect the most relevant statistical struc-
tures present in a spike train. Spike-GAN provides a powerful, easy-to-use tech-
nique for generating realistic spiking neural activity and for describing the most
relevant features of the large-scale neural population recordings studied in modern
systems neuroscience.

1

INTRODUCTION

Understanding how to generate synthetic spike trains simulating the activity of a population of neu-
rons is crucial for systems neuroscience. In computational neuroscience, important uses of faithfully
generated spike trains include creating biologically consistent inputs needed for the simulation of
realistic neural networks, generating large datasets to be used for the development and validation
of new spike train analysis techniques, and estimating the probabilities of neural responses in order
to extrapolate the information coding capacity of neurons beyond what can be computed from the
neural data obtained experimentally (Ince et al., 2013; Moreno-Bote et al., 2014). In experimental
systems neuroscience, the ability to develop models that produce realistic neural population pat-
terns and that identify the key sets of features in these patterns is fundamental to disentangling the
encoding strategies used by neurons for sensation or behavior (Panzeri et al., 2017) and to design
closed-loop experiments (Kim et al., 2017) in which synthetic patterns, representing salient features
of neural information, are fed to systems of electrical micro-stimulation (Tehovnik et al., 2006) or
patterned light optogenetics (Panzeri et al., 2017; Bovetti & Fellin, 2015) for naturalistic intervention
on neural circuits.
One successful way to generate realistic spike trains is that of using a bottom-up approach, focusing
explicitly on replicating selected low-level aspects of spike trains statistics. Popular methods include

1

