Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

GANITE: ESTIMATION OF INDIVIDUALIZED TREAT-
MENT EFFECTS USING GENERATIVE ADVERSARIAL
NETS

Jinsung Yoon
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
jsyoon0823@g.ucla.edu

James Jordon
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
james.jordon@wolfson.ox.ac.uk

Mihaela van der Schaar
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Alan Turing Institute, London, UK
mihaela.vanderschaar@eng.ox.ac.uk

ABSTRACT

Estimating individualized treatment effects (ITE) is a challenging task due to the
need for an individual’s potential outcomes to be learned from biased data and
without having access to the counterfactuals. We propose a novel method for
inferring ITE based on the Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) framework. Our
method, termed Generative Adversarial Nets for inference of Individualized Treat-
ment Effects (GANITE), is motivated by the possibility that we can capture the
uncertainty in the counterfactual distributions by attempting to learn them using a
GAN. We generate proxies of the counterfactual outcomes using a counterfactual
generator, G, and then pass these proxies to an ITE generator, I, in order to train
it. By modeling both of these using the GAN framework, we are able to infer
based on the factual data, while still accounting for the unseen counterfactuals.
We test our method on three real-world datasets (with both binary and multiple
treatments) and show that GANITE outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1

INTRODUCTION

Individualized treatment effects (ITE) estimation using observational data is a fundamental problem
that is applicable in a wide variety of domains. For instance, (1) in understanding the heterogeneous
effects of drugs (Shalit et al. (2017); Alaa & van der Schaar (2017); Alaa et al. (2017)); (2) in
evaluating the effect of a policy on unemployment rates (LaLonde (1986); Smith & Todd (2005));
(3) in verifying which factor causes a certain disease (H¨oﬂer (2005)) and (4) estimating the effects
of pollution on the weather (Hannart et al. (2016)).
As explained in Spirtes (2009), the problem of ITE estimation differs from the standard supervised
learning problem. First, among the potential outcomes, only the factual outcome is actually observed
(revealed), counterfactual outcomes are not observed and so the entire vector of potential outcomes
can never be obtained. Second, unlike randomized controlled trials (RCT), observational studies are
prone to treatment selection bias. For instance, left ventricular assist device (LVAD) treatment is
mostly applied to high-risk patients with severe cardiovascular diseases before heart transplantation,
the distribution of features among these patients will be signiﬁcantly different to the distribution
among non-LVAD treated patients (Kirklin et al. (2010)). The sample distribution can vary drasti-
cally across different choices of treatments and therefore, if we were to apply a supervised learning
framework for each treatment separately, the learned models would not generalize well to the entire
population.
Classical works in this domain solved the problem of estimating the average treatment effects from
observational data (Dehejia & Wahba (2002b); Lunceford & Davidian (2004)). These works account

1

