Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

LEARNING TO TEACH

Yang Fan†∗, Fei Tian‡∗, Tao Qin‡, Xiang-Yang Li†& Tie-Yan Liu‡
†School of Computer Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
fyabc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, xiangyangli@ustc.edu.cn
‡Microsoft Research
{fetia,taoqin,tyliu}@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT

Teaching plays a very important role in our society, by spreading human knowl-
edge and educating our next generations. A good teacher will select appropriate
teaching materials, impact suitable methodologies, and set up targeted examina-
tions, according to the learning behaviors of the students. In the ﬁeld of artiﬁcial
intelligence, however, one has not fully explored the role of teaching, and pays
most attention to machine learning. In this paper, we argue that equal attention, if
not more, should be paid to teaching, and furthermore, an optimization framework
(instead of heuristics) should be used to obtain good teaching strategies. We call
this approach “learning to teach”. In the approach, two intelligent agents interact
with each other: a student model (which corresponds to the learner in traditional
machine learning algorithms), and a teacher model (which determines the appro-
priate data, loss function, and hypothesis space to facilitate the training of the
student model). The teacher model leverages the feedback from the student model
to optimize its own teaching strategies by means of reinforcement learning, so as
to achieve teacher-student co-evolution. To demonstrate the practical value of our
proposed approach, we take the training of deep neural networks (DNN) as an ex-
ample, and show that by using the learning to teach techniques, we are able to use
much less training data and fewer iterations to achieve almost the same accura-
cy for different kinds of DNN models (e.g., multi-layer perceptron, convolutional
neural networks and recurrent neural networks) under various machine learning
tasks (e.g., image classiﬁcation and text understanding).

1

INTRODUCTION

The evolution of modern human society heavily depends on its advanced education system. The goal
of education is to equip the students with necessary knowledge and skills, so as to empower them to
further deepen the understanding of the world, and push the frontier of our humanity. In general, the
growth of a student will be inﬂuenced by two factors: his/her own learning ability and the teaching
ability of his/her teacher. Among these two, the teacher plays a critical role: an experienced teach-
er enables faster learning of a student through elaborated strategies such as selecting appropriate
teaching materials, imparting suitable methodologies, and setting up targeted examinations.
The training of an agent in artiﬁcial intelligence (e.g., an image classiﬁcation model) is very similar
to the growth of a student in human society. However, after carefully revisiting the literature of ar-
tiﬁcial intelligence (AI), we ﬁnd that the importance role of the teacher has not been fully realized.
Researchers put most of their efforts on the student, e.g., designing various optimization algorithms
to enhance the learning ability of intelligent agents. In contrast, there are very limited attempts on
building good teaching strategies, as brieﬂy summarized below. Machine teaching (Zhu, 2013; 2015;
Liu & Zhu, 2016; Liu et al., 2017) studies the problem of how to identify the smallest training set
to push the machine learning model towards a pre-deﬁned oracle model. Curriculum learning (CL)
(Bengio et al., 2009; Spitkovsky et al., 2010; Graves et al., 2017) and self-paced learning (SPL) (Ku-
mar et al., 2010; Lee & Grauman, 2011; Jiang et al., 2014b) heuristically deﬁne the scheduling of
training data in a from-easy-to-hard order. Graduated optimization (Hazan et al., 2016) heuristically
∗The ﬁrst two authors contribute equally to this paper. Works done when the ﬁrst author was visiting

Microsoft Research Asia.

1

