DEEP GAUSSIAN EMBEDDING OF GRAPHS:
UNSUPERVISED INDUCTIVE LEARNING VIA RANKING

Aleksandar Bojchevski, Stephan G¨unnemann
Technical University of Munich, Germany
{a.bojchevski,guennemann}@in.tum.de

ABSTRACT

Methods that learn representations of nodes in a graph play a critical role in net-
work analysis since they enable many downstream learning tasks. We propose
Graph2Gauss – an approach that can efﬁciently learn versatile node embeddings
on large scale (attributed) graphs that show strong performance on tasks such
as link prediction and node classiﬁcation. Unlike most approaches that repre-
sent nodes as point vectors in a low-dimensional continuous space, we embed
each node as a Gaussian distribution, allowing us to capture uncertainty about
the representation. Furthermore, we propose an unsupervised method that han-
dles inductive learning scenarios and is applicable to different types of graphs:
plain/attributed, directed/undirected. By leveraging both the network structure
and the associated node attributes, we are able to generalize to unseen nodes with-
out additional training. To learn the embeddings we adopt a personalized ranking
formulation w.r.t. the node distances that exploits the natural ordering of the nodes
imposed by the network structure. Experiments on real world networks demon-
strate the high performance of our approach, outperforming state-of-the-art net-
work embedding methods on several different tasks. Additionally, we demonstrate
the beneﬁts of modeling uncertainty – by analyzing it we can estimate neighbor-
hood diversity and detect the intrinsic latent dimensionality of a graph.

1

INTRODUCTION

Graphs are a natural representation for a wide variety of real-life data, from social and rating net-
works (Facebook, Amazon), to gene interactions and citation networks (BioGRID, arXiv). Node
embeddings are a powerful and increasingly popular approach to analyze such data (Cai et al.,
2017). By operating in the embedding space, one can employ proved learning techniques and bypass
the difﬁculty of incorporating the complex node interactions. Tasks such as link prediction, node
classiﬁcation, community detection, and visualization all greatly beneﬁt from these latent node rep-
resentations. Furthermore, for attributed graphs by leveraging both sources of information (network
structure and attributes) one is able to learn more useful representations compared to approaches
that only consider the graph (Yang et al., 2015; Pan et al., 2016; Ganguly & Pudi, 2017).
All existing (attributed) graph embedding approaches represent each node by a single point in a
low-dimensional continuous vector space. Representing the nodes simply as points, however, has
a crucial limitation: we do not have information about the uncertainty of that representation. Yet
uncertainty is inherent when describing a node in a complex graph by a single point only. Imagine a
node for which the different sources of information are conﬂicting with each other, e.g. pointing to
different communities or even revealing contradicting underlying patterns. Such discrepancy should
be reﬂected in the uncertainty of its embedding. As a solution to this problem, we introduce a novel
embedding approach that represents nodes as Gaussian distributions: each node becomes a full
distribution rather than a single point. Thereby, we capture uncertainty about its representation.
To effectively capture the non-i.i.d. nature of the data arising from the complex interactions between
the nodes, we further propose a novel unsupervised personalized ranking formulation to learn the
embeddings. Intuitively, from the point of view of a single node, we want nodes in its immediate
neighborhood to be closest in the embedding space, while nodes multiple hops away should become
increasingly more distant. This ordering between the nodes imposed by the network structure w.r.t

1

