Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

SPHERICAL CNNS

Taco S. Cohen∗
University of Amsterdam

Mario Geiger∗
EPFL

Jonas Köhler∗
University of Amsterdam

Max Welling
University of Amsterdam & CIFAR

ABSTRACT

Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have become the method of choice for
learning problems involving 2D planar images. However, a number of problems of
recent interest have created a demand for models that can analyze spherical images.
Examples include omnidirectional vision for drones, robots, and autonomous cars,
molecular regression problems, and global weather and climate modelling. A
naive application of convolutional networks to a planar projection of the spherical
signal is destined to fail, because the space-varying distortions introduced by such
a projection will make translational weight sharing ineffective.
In this paper we introduce the building blocks for constructing spherical CNNs.
We propose a deﬁnition for the spherical cross-correlation that is both expres-
sive and rotation-equivariant. The spherical correlation satisﬁes a generalized
Fourier theorem, which allows us to compute it efﬁciently using a generalized
(non-commutative) Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm. We demonstrate the
computational efﬁciency, numerical accuracy, and effectiveness of spherical CNNs
applied to 3D model recognition and atomization energy regression.

1

INTRODUCTION

Convolutional networks are able to detect local patterns regardless
of their position in the image. Like patterns in a planar image,
patterns on the sphere can move around, but in this case the “move”
is a 3D rotation instead of a translation. In analogy to the planar
CNN, we would like to build a network that can detect patterns
regardless of how they are rotated over the sphere.
As shown in Figure 1, there is no good way to use translational
convolution or cross-correlation1 to analyze spherical signals. The
most obvious approach, then, is to change the deﬁnition of cross-
correlation by replacing ﬁlter translations by rotations. Doing so,
we run into a subtle but important difference between the plane
and the sphere: whereas the space of moves for the plane (2D
translations) is itself isomorphic to the plane, the space of moves
for the sphere (3D rotations) is a different, three-dimensional
manifold called SO(3)2. It follows that the result of a spherical
correlation (the output feature map) is to be considered a signal on
SO(3), not a signal on the sphere, S2. For this reason, we deploy
SO(3) group correlation in the higher layers of a spherical CNN
(Cohen and Welling, 2016).

Figure 1: Any planar projec-
tion of a spherical signal will re-
sult in distortions. Rotation of a
spherical signal cannot be emu-
lated by translation of its planar
projection.

∗Equal contribution.
1Despite the name, CNNs typically use cross-correlation instead of convolution in the forward pass. In this

paper we will generally use the term cross-correlation, or correlation for short.

2To be more precise: although the symmetry group of the plane contains more than just translations, the
translations form a subgroup that acts on the plane. In the case of the sphere there is no coherent way to deﬁne a
composition for points on the sphere, and so the sphere cannot act on itself (it is not a group). For this reason,
we must consider the whole of SO(3).

1

