Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

DEEP LEARNING FOR PHYSICAL PROCESSES:
INCORPORATING PRIOR SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE

Emmanuel de B´ezenac ∗, Arthur Pajot ∗, Patrick Gallinari
{emmanuel.de-bezenac, arthur.pajot, patrick.gallinari}@lip6.fr
Sorbonne Universit´es, UMR 7606, LIP6, F-75005 Paris, France

ABSTRACT

We consider the use of Deep Learning methods for modeling complex phenomena
like those occurring in natural physical processes. With the large amount of data
gathered on these phenomena the data intensive paradigm could begin to chal-
lenge more traditional approaches elaborated over the years in ﬁelds like maths
or physics. However, despite considerable successes in a variety of application
domains, the machine learning ﬁeld is not yet ready to handle the level of com-
plexity required by such problems. Using an example application, namely Sea
Surface Temperature Prediction, we show how general background knowledge
gained from the physics could be used as a guideline for designing efﬁcient Deep
Learning models. In order to motivate the approach and to assess its generality
we demonstrate a formal link between the solution of a class of differential equa-
tions underlying a large family of physical phenomena and the proposed model.
Experiments and comparison with series of baselines including a state of the art
numerical approach is then provided.

1

INTRODUCTION

A physical process is a sustained phenomenon marked by gradual changes through a series of states
occurring in the physical world. Physicists and environmental scientists attempt to model these
processes in a principled way through analytic descriptions of the scientist’s prior knowledge of
the underlying processes. Conservation laws, physical principles or phenomenological behaviors
are generally formalized using differential equations. This physical paradigm has been, and still is
the main framework for modeling complex natural phenomena like e.g. those involved in climate.
With the availability of very large datasets captured via different types of sensors, this physical
modeling paradigm is being challenged by the statistical Machine Learning (ML) paradigm, which
offers a prior-agnostic approach. However, despite impressive successes in a variety of domains
as demonstrated by the deployment of Deep Learning methods in ﬁelds such as vision, language,
speech, etc, the statistical approach is not yet ready to challenge the physical paradigm for modeling
complex natural phenomena, or at least it has not demonstrated how to. This is a new challenge for
this ﬁeld and an emerging research direction in the ML community. We believe that knowledge and
techniques accumulated for modeling physical processes in well developed ﬁelds such as maths or
physics could be useful as a guideline to design efﬁcient learning systems and conversely, that the
ML paradigm could open new directions for modeling such complex phenomena. In this paper we
then raise two issues: 1) are modern ML techniques ready to be used to model complex physical
phenomena, and 2) how general knowledge gained from the physical modeling paradigm could help
designing efﬁcient ML models.
In this work, we tackle these questions by considering a speciﬁc physical modeling problem: fore-
casting sea surface temperature (SST). SST plays a signiﬁcant role in analyzing and assessing the
dynamics of weather and other biological systems. Accurately modeling and predicting such dynam-
ics is critical in various applications such as weather forecasting, or planning of coastal activities.
Since 1982, weather satellites have made huge quantities of very high resolution SST data available
Bernstein (1982). Standard physical methods for forecasting SST use coupled ocean-atmosphere
prediction systems, based on the Navier Stokes equations. These models rely on multiple physical

∗equal contribution

1

