Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

EMERGENCE OF LINGUISTIC COMMUNICATION FROM
REFERENTIAL GAMES WITH SYMBOLIC AND PIXEL
INPUT

Angeliki Lazaridou∗, Karl Moritz Hermann, Karl Tuyls, Stephen Clark
DeepMind,
London, UK

ABSTRACT

The ability of algorithms to evolve or learn (compositional) communication pro-
tocols has traditionally been studied in the language evolution literature through
the use of emergent communication tasks. Here we scale up this research by us-
ing contemporary deep learning methods and by training reinforcement-learning
neural network agents on referential communication games. We extend previ-
ous work, in which agents were trained in symbolic environments, by developing
agents which are able to learn from raw pixel data, a more challenging and realis-
tic input representation. We ﬁnd that the degree of structure found in the input data
affects the nature of the emerged protocols, and thereby corroborate the hypoth-
esis that structured compositional language is most likely to emerge when agents
perceive the world as being structured.

1

INTRODUCTION

The study of emergent communication is important for two related problems in language develop-
ment, both human and artiﬁcial: language evolution, the development of communication protocols
from scratch (Nowak & Krakauer, 1999); and language acquisition, the ability of an embodied
agent to learn an existing language. In this paper we focus on the problem of how environmental
or pre-linguistic conditions affect the nature of the communication protocol that an agent learns.
The increasing realism and complexity of environments being used for grounded language learning
(Brockman et al., 2016; Hermann et al., 2017) present an opportunity to analyse these effects in
detail.
In line with previous work on emergent communication, we are strongly motivated by the view that
language derives meaning from its use (Wittgenstein, 1953; Wagner et al., 2003). This perspective
especially motivates the study of language emergence in cases where co-operative agents try to
achieve shared goals in game scenarios (Steels, 2003; Brighton & Kirby, 2006; Mordatch & Abbeel,
2017), and is related to the study of multi-agent and self-play methods that have found great success
in other areas of machine learning (Bansal et al., 2017; Silver et al., 2017). Here we focus on simple
referential games, in which one agent must communicate to another a target object in the agent’s
environment.
One of the most important properties of natural language is compositionality. Smaller building
blocks (e.g. words, morphemes) are used to generate unbounded numbers of more complex forms
(e.g. sentences, multi-word expressions), with the meaning of the larger form being determined
by the meanings of its parts and how they are put together (Frege, 1892). Compositionality is an
advantage in any communication protocol as it allows in principle inﬁnite expression through a ﬁnite
dictionary and a ﬁnite set of combination rules. In emergent communication research, previous work
has shown that agents can produce (somewhat) compositional protocols when engaging in language
games (Steels, 2003). However, the computational agents were typically situated in artiﬁcial worlds
containing just a handful of objects, represented as disentangled, structured, and sometimes even
atomic symbols, e.g. attribute-based or one-hot vectors (Batali, 1998; Brighton, 2002; Franke, 2015;
Andreas & Klein, 2017; Mordatch & Abbeel, 2017). However, humans receive raw sensorimotor

∗Corresponding author: angeliki@google.com

1

