Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

SEMI-PARAMETRIC TOPOLOGICAL MEMORY
FOR NAVIGATION

Nikolay Savinov∗
ETH Z¨urich

Alexey Dosovitskiy∗
Intel Labs

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

ABSTRACT

We introduce a new memory architecture for navigation in previously unseen envi-
ronments, inspired by landmark-based navigation in animals. The proposed semi-
parametric topological memory (SPTM) consists of a (non-parametric) graph with
nodes corresponding to locations in the environment and a (parametric) deep net-
work capable of retrieving nodes from the graph based on observations. The graph
stores no metric information, only connectivity of locations corresponding to the
nodes. We use SPTM as a planning module in a navigation system. Given only 5
minutes of footage of a previously unseen maze, an SPTM-based navigation agent
can build a topological map of the environment and use it to conﬁdently navigate
towards goals. The average success rate of the SPTM agent in goal-directed nav-
igation across test environments is higher than the best-performing baseline by a
factor of three.

1

INTRODUCTION

Deep learning (DL) has recently been used as an efﬁcient approach to learning navigation in complex
three-dimensional environments. DL-based approaches to navigation can be broadly divided into
three classes: purely reactive (Dosovitskiy & Koltun, 2017; Zhu et al., 2017), based on unstructured
general-purpose memory such as LSTM (Mnih et al., 2016; Mirowski et al., 2017), and employing
a navigation-speciﬁc memory structure based on a metric map (Parisotto & Salakhutdinov, 2018;
Gupta et al., 2017).
However, extensive evidence from psychology suggests that when traversing environments, animals
do not rely strongly on metric representations (Gillner & Mallot, 1998; Wang & Spelke, 2002; Foo
et al., 2005). Rather, animals employ a range of specialized navigation strategies of increasing com-
plexity. According to Foo et al. (2005), one such strategy is landmark navigation – “the ability to
orient with respect to a known object”. Another is route-based navigation that “involves remember-
ing speciﬁc sequences of positions”. Finally, map-based navigation assumes a “survey knowledge
of the environmental layout”, but the map need not be metric and in fact it is typically not: “[. . .] hu-
mans do not integrate experience on speciﬁc routes into a metric cognitive map for navigation [. . .]
Rather, they primarily depend on a landmark-based navigation strategy, which can be supported by
qualitative topological knowledge of the environment.”
In this paper, we propose semi-parametric topological memory (SPTM) – a deep-learning-based
memory architecture for navigation, inspired by landmark-based navigation in animals. SPTM con-
sists of two components: a non-parametric memory graph G where each node corresponds to a
location in the environment, and a parametric deep network R capable of retrieving nodes from the
graph based on observations. The graph contains no metric relations between the nodes, only con-
nectivity information. While exploring the environment, the agent builds the graph by appending
observations to it and adding shortcut connections based on detected visual similarities. The net-
work R is trained to retrieve nodes from the graph based on an observation of the environment. This
allows the agent to localize itself in the graph. Finally, we build a complete SPTM-based navigation
agent by complementing the memory with a locomotion network L, which allows the agent to move
between nodes in the graph. The R and L networks are trained in self-supervised fashion, without
any manual labeling or reward signal.

∗Shared ﬁrst authorship

1

