Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

COMMUNICATION ALGORITHMS VIA DEEP LEARNING

Hyeji Kim∗, Yihan Jiang†, Ranvir Rana*, Sreeram Kannan†, Sewoong Oh*, Pramod Viswanath*
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign*, University of Washington†

ABSTRACT

Coding theory is a central discipline underpinning wireline and wireless modems
that are the workhorses of the information age. Progress in coding theory is largely
driven by individual human ingenuity with sporadic breakthroughs over the past
century. In this paper we study whether it is possible to automate the discovery
of decoding algorithms via deep learning. We study a family of sequential codes
parametrized by recurrent neural network (RNN) architectures. We show that cre-
atively designed and trained RNN architectures can decode well known sequential
codes such as the convolutional and turbo codes with close to optimal performance
on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, which itself is achieved by
breakthrough algorithms of our times (Viterbi and BCJR decoders, representing
dynamic programing and forward-backward algorithms). We show strong gen-
eralizations, i.e., we train at a speciﬁc signal to noise ratio and block length but
test at a wide range of these quantities, as well as robustness and adaptivity to
deviations from the AWGN setting.

1

INTRODUCTION

Reliable digital communication, both wireline (ethernet, cable and DSL modems) and wireless (cel-
lular, satellite, deep space), is a primary workhorse of the modern information age. A critical aspect
of reliable communication involves the design of codes that allow transmissions to be robustly (and
computationally efﬁciently) decoded under noisy conditions. This is the discipline of coding the-
ory; over the past century and especially the past 70 years (since the birth of information theory
(Shannon, 1948)) much progress has been made in the design of near optimal codes. Landmark
codes include convolutional codes, turbo codes, low density parity check (LDPC) codes and, re-
cently, polar codes. The impact on humanity is enormous – every cellular phone designed uses one
of these codes, which feature in global cellular standards ranging from the 2nd generation to the 5th
generation respectively, and are text book material (Richardson & Urbanke, 2008).
The canonical setting is one of point-to-point reliable communication over the additive white Gaus-
sian noise (AWGN) channel and performance of a code in this setting is its gold standard. The
AWGN channel ﬁts much of wireline and wireless communications although the front end of the
receiver may have to be speciﬁcally designed before being processed by the decoder (example: in-
tersymbol equalization in cable modems, beamforming and sphere decoding in multiple antenna
wireless systems); again this is text book material (Tse & Viswanath, 2005). There are two long
term goals in coding theory: (a) design of new, computationally efﬁcient, codes that improve the
state of the art (probability of correct reception) over the AWGN setting. Since the current codes
already operate close to the information theoretic “Shannon limit”, the emphasis is on robustness
and adaptability to deviations from the AWGN settings (a list of channel models motivated by prac-
tical settings, (such as urban, pedestrian, vehicular) in the recent 5th generation cellular standard
is available in Annex B of 3GPP TS 36.101.) (b) design of new codes for multi-terminal (i.e., be-
yond point-to-point) settings – examples include the feedback channel, the relay channel and the
interference channel.

∗H. Kim, R. Rana and P. Viswanath are with Coordinated Science Lab and Department of Electrical En-
gineering at University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign. S. Oh is with Coordinated Science Lab and Depart-
ment of Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering at University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign. Email:
{hyejikim,rbrana2,swoh,pramodv}@illinois.edu (H. Kim, R. Rana, S.Oh, and P.Viswanath)
†Y. Jiang and S. Kannan are with Department of Electrical Engineering at University of Washington. Email:

yihanrogerjiang@gmail.com (Y. Jiang), ksreeram@uw.edu (S. Kannan)

1

