Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

RELATIONAL NEURAL EXPECTATION MAXIMIZATION:
UNSUPERVISED DISCOVERY OF OBJECTS AND THEIR
INTERACTIONS

Sjoerd van Steenkiste
Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, SUPSI, USI
Lugano, Switzerland
sjoerd@idsia.ch

Klaus Greff
Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, SUPSI, USI
Lugano, Switzerland
klaus@idsia.ch

Michael Chang ∗
UC Berkeley
Berkeley, United States
mbchang@berkeley.edu

Jürgen Schmidhuber
Swiss AI Lab IDSIA, SUPSI, USI
Lugano, Switzerland
juergen@idsia.ch

ABSTRACT

Common-sense physical reasoning is an essential ingredient for any intelligent
agent operating in the real-world. For example, it can be used to simulate the
environment, or to infer the state of parts of the world that are currently unobserved.
In order to match real-world conditions this causal knowledge must be learned
without access to supervised data. To address this problem we present a novel
method that learns to discover objects and model their physical interactions from
raw visual images in a purely unsupervised fashion. It incorporates prior knowl-
edge about the compositional nature of human perception to factor interactions
between object-pairs and learn efﬁciently. On videos of bouncing balls we show
the superior modelling capabilities of our method compared to other unsupervised
neural approaches that do not incorporate such prior knowledge. We demonstrate
its ability to handle occlusion and show that it can extrapolate learned knowledge
to scenes with different numbers of objects.

1

INTRODUCTION

Humans rely on common-sense physical reasoning to solve many everyday physics-related tasks (Lake
et al., 2016). For example, it enables them to foresee the consequences of their actions (simulation),
or to infer the state of parts of the world that are currently unobserved. This causal understanding is
an essential ingredient for any intelligent agent that is to operate within the world.
Common-sense physical reasoning is facilitated by the discovery and representation of objects (a core
domain of human cognition (Spelke & Kinzler, 2007)) that serve as primitives of a compositional
system. They allow humans to decompose a complex visual scene into distinct parts, describe
relations between them and reason about their dynamics as well as the consequences of their
interactions (Battaglia et al., 2013; Lake et al., 2016; Ullman et al., 2017).
The most successful machine learning approaches to common-sense physical reasoning incorporate
such prior knowledge in their design. They maintain explicit object representations, which allow for
general physical dynamics to be learned between object pairs in a compositional manner (Battaglia
et al., 2016; Chang et al., 2016; Watters et al., 2017). However, in these approaches learning is
supervised, as it relies on object-representations from external sources (e.g. a physics simulator) that
are typically unavailable in real-world scenarios.
Neural approaches that learn to directly model motion or physical interactions in pixel space offer an
alternative solution (Srivastava et al., 2015; Sutskever et al., 2009). However, while unsupervised,

∗Work performed while at IDSIA.

1

