Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

UNSUPERVISED CIPHER CRACKING USING DISCRETE
GANS

Aidan N. Gomez 1,2
aidan@cs.toronto.edu

Ivan Zhang 2
ivan@ivanzhang.ca

Sicong Huang 1,2
huang@cs.toronto.edu

Bryan M. Li 1,2
bryan@bryanli.io

Muhammad Osama 1,2
muhammad.osama@mcode.ca

Łukasz Kaiser 3
lukaszkaiser@google.com

1 Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto
2 FOR.ai
3 Google Brain

ABSTRACT

This work details CipherGAN, an architecture inspired by CycleGAN used for
inferring the underlying cipher mapping given banks of unpaired ciphertext and
plaintext. We demonstrate that CipherGAN is capable of cracking language data
enciphered using shift and Vigen`ere ciphers to a high degree of ﬁdelity and for
vocabularies much larger than previously achieved. We present how CycleGAN
can be made compatible with discrete data and train in a stable way. We then
prove that the technique used in CipherGAN avoids the common problem of un-
informative discrimination associated with GANs applied to discrete data.

1

INTRODUCTION

Humans have been encoding messages for secrecy since before the ancient Greeks, and for the
same amount of time, have been fascinated with trying to crack these codes using brute-force, fre-
quency analysis, crib-dragging and even espionage. Simple ciphers have, in the past century, been
rendered irrelevant in favor of the more secure encryption schemes enabled by modern computa-
tional resources. However, the question of cipher-cracking remains an interesting problem since it
requires an intimate understanding of the structure in a language. Nearly all automated cipher crack-
ing techniques have had to rely on a human-in-the-loop; grounding the automated techniques in a
human’s preexisting knowledge of language to clean up the errors made by simple algorithms such
as frequency analysis. Across a number of domains, the use of hand-crafted features has often been
replaced by automatic feature extraction directly from data using end-to-end learning frameworks
(Goodfellow et al., 2016). The question to be addressed is as follows:

Can a neural network be trained to deduce withheld ciphers from unaligned text, without the

supplementation of preexisting human knowledge?

The implications for such a general framework would be far-reaching in the ﬁeld of unsupervised
translation, where each language can be treated as an enciphering of the other. The decoding of
the Copiale cipher (Knight et al., 2011) stands as an excellent example of the potential for machine
learning techniques to decode enciphered texts by treating the problem as language translation. The
CycleGAN (Zhu et al., 2017) architecture is extremely general and we demonstrate our adaptation,
CipherGAN, is capable of cracking ciphers to an extremely high degree of accuracy. CipherGAN

Code available at: github.com/for-ai/ciphergan

1

