Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

IMPLICIT CAUSAL MODELS FOR
GENOME-WIDE ASSOCIATION STUDIES

Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review

ABSTRACT

Progress in probabilistic generative models has accelerated, developing richer
models with neural architectures, implicit densities, and with scalable algorithms
for their Bayesian inference. However, there has been limited progress in mod-
els that capture causal relationships, for example, how individual genetic factors
cause major human diseases. In this work, we focus on two challenges in partic-
ular: How do we build richer causal models, which can capture highly nonlinear
relationships and interactions between multiple causes? How do we adjust for la-
tent confounders, which are variables inﬂuencing both cause and effect and which
prevent learning of causal relationships? To address these challenges, we syn-
thesize ideas from causality and modern probabilistic modeling. For the ﬁrst, we
describe implicit causal models, a class of causal models that leverages neural ar-
chitectures with an implicit density. For the second, we describe an implicit causal
model that adjusts for confounders by sharing strength across examples. In exper-
iments, we scale Bayesian inference on up to a billion genetic measurements. We
achieve state of the art accuracy for identifying causal factors: we signiﬁcantly
outperform existing genetics methods by an absolute difference of 15-45.3%.

INTRODUCTION

1
Probabilistic models provide a language for specifying rich and ﬂexible generative processes (Pearl,
1988; Murphy, 2012). Recent advances expand this language with neural architectures, implicit den-
sities, and with scalable algorithms for their Bayesian inference (Rezende et al., 2014; Tran et al.,
2017). However, there has been limited progress in models that capture high-dimensional causal
relationships (Pearl, 2000; Spirtes et al., 1993; Imbens & Rubin, 2015). Unlike models which learn
statistical relationships, causal models let us manipulate the generative process and make counter-
factual statements, that is, what would have happened if the distributions changed.
As the running example in this work, consider genome-wide association studies (GWAS) (Yu et al.,
2005; Price et al., 2006; Kang et al., 2010). The goal of GWAS is to understand how genetic factors,
i.e., single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), cause traits to appear in individuals. Understanding
this causation both lets us predict whether an individual has a genetic predisposition to a disease and
also understand how to cure the disease by targeting the individual SNPs that cause it.
With this example in mind, we focus on two challenges to combining modern probabilistic models
and causality. The ﬁrst is to develop richer, more expressive causal models. Probabilistic causal
models represent variables as deterministic functions of noise and other variables, and existing work
usually focuses on additive noise models (Hoyer et al., 2009) such as linear mixed models (Kang
et al., 2010). These models apply simple nonlinearities such as polynomials, hand-engineered low
order interactions between inputs, and assume additive interaction with, e.g., Gaussian noise. In
GWAS, strong evidence suggests that susceptibility to common diseases is inﬂuenced by epistasis
(the interaction between multiple genes) (Culverhouse et al., 2002; McKinney et al., 2006). We
would like to capture and discover such interactions. This requires models with nonlinear, learnable
interactions among the inputs and the noise.
The second challenge is how to address latent population-based confounders. In GWAS, both la-
tent population structure, i.e., subgroups in the population with ancestry differences, and relatedness
among sample individuals produce spurious correlations among SNPs to the trait of interest. Exist-
ing methods correct for this correlation in two stages (Yu et al., 2005; Price et al., 2006; Kang et al.,

1

