Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018

NOISY NETWORKS FOR EXPLORATION

Meire Fortunato∗ Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar∗ Bilal Piot ∗

Jacob Menick Matteo Hessel

Ian Osband Alex Graves Vlad Mnih

Remi Munos Demis Hassabis Olivier Pietquin Charles Blundell

Shane Legg

DeepMind {meirefortunato,mazar,piot,
jmenick,mtthss,iosband,gravesa,vmnih,
munos,dhcontact,pietquin,cblundell,legg}@google.com

ABSTRACT

We introduce NoisyNet, a deep reinforcement learning agent with parametric noise
added to its weights, and show that the induced stochasticity of the agent’s policy
can be used to aid efﬁcient exploration. The parameters of the noise are learned
with gradient descent along with the remaining network weights. NoisyNet is
straightforward to implement and adds little computational overhead. We ﬁnd that
replacing the conventional exploration heuristics for A3C, DQN and Dueling agents
(entropy reward and -greedy respectively) with NoisyNet yields substantially
higher scores for a wide range of Atari games, in some cases advancing the agent
from sub to super-human performance.

1

INTRODUCTION

Despite the wealth of research into efﬁcient methods for exploration in Reinforcement Learning (RL)
(Kearns & Singh, 2002; Jaksch et al., 2010), most exploration heuristics rely on random perturbations
of the agent’s policy, such as -greedy (Sutton & Barto, 1998) or entropy regularisation (Williams,
1992), to induce novel behaviours. However such local ‘dithering’ perturbations are unlikely to lead
to the large-scale behavioural patterns needed for efﬁcient exploration in many environments (Osband
et al., 2017).
Optimism in the face of uncertainty is a common exploration heuristic in reinforcement learning.
Various forms of this heuristic often come with theoretical guarantees on agent performance (Azar
et al., 2017; Lattimore et al., 2013; Jaksch et al., 2010; Auer & Ortner, 2007; Kearns & Singh,
2002). However, these methods are often limited to small state-action spaces or to linear function
approximations and are not easily applied with more complicated function approximators such
as neural networks (except from work by (Geist & Pietquin, 2010a;b) but it doesn’t come with
convergence guarantees). A more structured approach to exploration is to augment the environment’s
reward signal with an additional intrinsic motivation term (Singh et al., 2004) that explicitly rewards
novel discoveries. Many such terms have been proposed, including learning progress (Oudeyer &
Kaplan, 2007), compression progress (Schmidhuber, 2010), variational information maximisation
(Houthooft et al., 2016) and prediction gain (Bellemare et al., 2016). One problem is that these
methods separate the mechanism of generalisation from that of exploration; the metric for intrinsic
reward, and–importantly–its weighting relative to the environment reward, must be chosen by the
experimenter, rather than learned from interaction with the environment. Without due care, the
optimal policy can be altered or even completely obscured by the intrinsic rewards; furthermore,
dithering perturbations are usually needed as well as intrinsic reward to ensure robust exploration
(Ostrovski et al., 2017). Exploration in the policy space itself, for example, with evolutionary or black
box algorithms (Moriarty et al., 1999; Fix & Geist, 2012; Salimans et al., 2017), usually requires
many prolonged interactions with the environment. Although these algorithms are quite generic and

∗Equal contribution.

1

